Comet

Comet Hale-Bopp.
A comet is a small body in the solar system, similar to an asteroid, but composed mainly of ice, surrounded by a coma of gas and dust released by the Sun's radiation. Comets often have very eccentric orbits, and when they approach the Sun close enough, they leave behind a tail millions of kilometers long, pointing away from the Sun.

Comet-like objects can be divided into three categories. Long-period comets orbit in the Oort cloud or have an orbital period of more than 200 years. Short-period comets orbit in the Kuiper belt and have an orbital period of less than 200 years. Asteroid belt comets orbit in the Asteroid Belt.

About a dozen comets are currently observed each year, most of which can only be seen with a telescope and some with binoculars. Large comets, which are visible to the naked eye, appear on average once or twice a decade. The previous bright comets were Hale-Bopp in 1997 and Hyakutake a year earlier. On January 12, 2007, comet C/2006 P1 (McNaught), which is in perihelion, reached a brightness of magnitude –2.

Structure

The external structure of a comet.
Nuclear
The nucleus of a comet is usually a few kilometers in diameter, up to 50 kilometers. It is quite loose in structure and consists of an average of 75% carbon dioxide, methane and water ice. Water is the most abundant of these, 80% in Halley's Comet. Other compounds found in comets are carbon monoxide CO and formaldehyde H2CO. The main elements in the nucleus are therefore hydrogen, carbon, nitrogen and oxygen.

The remaining 25 percent consists of gravel and dust formed by various minerals, which are present in the ice. The surface of the nucleus is possibly covered with organic compounds, which, when heavier, have remained after the ice has evaporated and which form a tar-like layer. Organic compounds are very dark, and so comet nuclei are some of the darkest objects in the solar system. For example, the albedo of Halley's Comet is 0.04 and that of Barrelly's is only 0.024–0.03, while asphalt has a 0.07 albedo. Fred Whipple has described the comet nucleus as a "dirty snowball".

The forces holding the nucleus together are so weak that the release of gas and dust, the enormous temperature fluctuations as the comet travels in its orbit, and the tidal forces exerted by the planets often cause the nucleus to break up into smaller pieces as the comet approaches its perihelion. For example, Comet West was seen to break up into four or five pieces shortly after its perihelion in 1975; Shoemaker-Levy 9, on the other hand, passed Jupiter within 21,000 km in 1992 and broke into hundreds of pieces, before crashing into the planet two years later. This event was the first collision between celestial bodies observed by astronomers. The Tunguska explosion in Siberia in 1908 may also have been caused by a comet.

Solar radiation causes the snow and ice on the surface of the nucleus to melt and vaporize or sublimate directly into vapor, and dust and debris are also released. Halley's Comet released 10–40 tons of gas per second at perihelion, as well as several tons of dust. The released material forms a coma around the nucleus, a thin veil of gas that, when close to the Sun, can grow even larger than the star itself and become very sparse. The release of material causes the coma to brighten considerably; however, the gas discharges are very irregular, and so the brightness of comets is difficult to predict in advance. Further from the Sun, a comet can be distinguished from asteroids externally mainly by its weak coma; in the Oort cloud, comets are simply blocks of ice.

Tail
When a comet enters the inner solar system, the Sun's radiation pressure and the solar wind cause particles to break away from the surface of the nucleus. They stretch out into a tail pointing away from the Sun, which can be up to 150 million kilometers long – the same as the distance between the Earth and the Sun. The tail is often divided into two parts, a dust tail and a gas or plasma tail. The dust tail is formed by dust released by the radiation pressure, the velocities of the particles of which are relatively low, which causes the tail to curve towards the comet's orbit. The dust tail is yellowish in color, and it directly reflects sunlight. Sometimes the dust tail is curved so much that when viewed from the Earth at the right angle, it appears to point towards the Sun; in such cases it is misleadingly called a countertail.

The plasma tail consists of partially ionized gas and very fine dust ejected by the solar wind, and points directly away from the Sun. The tail is bluish in color, the color being produced by atoms excited by ultraviolet radiation. The plasma tail also reflects some sunlight. The sharp, sinuous patterns sometimes seen in the tail are the result of patterns in the Sun's magnetic field that the solar wind follows.

Origin
Comets are thought to be remnants of the early Solar System, when they, like other bodies, condensed from the protoplanetary disk and were thrown into distant orbits by the gravity of young gas giant planets.[1] They formed the Oort cloud 50,000–100,000 AU from the Sun, where their orbits gradually became more circular due to the influence of nearby stars. However, their orbits were no longer in the plane of the Solar System, but were scattered all around the Solar System. Interactions with the corresponding zones of other stars are one possible reason why some comets are thrown back into elliptical orbits close to the Sun.

Orbit

The orbit of a typical comet. Near the Sun, the orbital speed of a comet increases significantly compared to more distant parts. A = Sun, B = planet, C = comet.
Based on their orbits, comets can be roughly divided into two groups. The aphelions of long-period comets are mostly located at a distance of about 50,000 AU in the Oort cloud, where they are thought to number up to hundreds of billions, or even several tens of Earth masses. The concentration at the aphelions of long-period comets was first noticed by Jan Oort in 1950. Short-period comets have an orbital period of less than 200 years, and are quite young. Gerard Kuiper showed in 1951 that they originate from a different comet population than long-period ones: their orbital inclination is less than 40° and they orbit the Sun in the same direction as the planets. According to him, they came from a zone just beyond the orbit of Neptune, which is now called the Kuiper belt.

Some comets have unusual orbits. Encke's comet orbits the Sun at its closest within the orbit of Mercury and at its farthest within the orbit of Jupiter. Comet 29P/Schwassmann-Wachmann, on the other hand, constantly stays between the orbits of Jupiter and Saturn, while comet 2060 Chiron, previously classified as an asteroid, orbits between Saturn and Uranus. It has a small coma that distinguishes it from asteroids. Some comets orbit extremely close to the Sun and may even hit it. On the other hand, the strong gravity of Jupiter and Saturn can throw a comet completely out of the solar system. So far, no comet has been detected that came from outside the solar system.

A sunspot is a comet whose orbit takes it very close to the Sun at perihelion. In this case, a small or icy comet may vaporize completely and not survive the passage by the Sun. The brightness of the comet depends on how well it survives the heat of the Sun. [2]

Asteroid belt comets orbit in the Asteroid Belt. They are asteroids that have comet-like properties. Some are classified as both minor planets and comets. Asteroid belt comets have circular orbits, typical of asteroids in the belt, and their orbits are low in inclination. These celestial bodies are believed to have formed in the Asteroid Belt.

Well-known comets
Halley's Comet
A comet rises
Shoemaker-Disc 9
Hale-Bopp
Hyakutake
17P/Holmes brightened almost a million times on October 24, 2007
C/2020 F3 (NEOWISE)
Beliefs
Comets have been considered significant omens in ancient times. In the Middle Ages in Europe, comets were considered omens of bad times. However, this has nothing to do with the fact that comets are now known to be capable of colliding with the Earth. The Finnish name pyurstötähti also tells us why it was thought to be: a star with a tail. Stars and planets (which were also called stars, orbiting stars) have been imagined as parts of a fixed or composed of fixed parts of the sky or other divine stage on which everything follows a predetermined path with the precision of an inexorable clock. Against this background, everything exceptional has been understood as signs that divine power has deliberately made visible to humans. Therefore, it must be something very important.
