Mars

Discovery
Discovery period 	prehistoric[1]
Orbital characteristics
Average distance from the Sun 	227,920,000[1] km
1.52366231 AU
Eccentricity 	0.09341233
Orbital period around the Sun 	686.9601 d
Synodic period 	779.96 d
Average orbital speed 	24.077 km/s
Inclination 	1.85061°
Number of threads 	2
Physical properties
Equatorial diameter 	6,792.4[1] km
Area 	1,448 108 km2
Mass 	6.4185 1023 kg
0.108 Earth masses
Average density 	3.934 g/cm3
Gravity acceleration on the surface 	3.71 m/s2
Rotation period 	24.622962 h (i.e. 1 sol)
Axis inclination 	25.19°
Albedo 	0.15
Escape velocity 	5.027 km/s
Lowest surface temperature 	: 133 K (−140 °C)
average: 210 K (−63 °C)
highest: 293 K (20 °C)
Gas ring properties
Gas pressure 	0.7–0.9 kPa
Composition
carbon dioxide
nitrogen
argon
oxygen
carbon monoxide
water vapor
nitrous oxide
neon
krypton
xenon
ozone
methane 	95.32 %
2.7%
1.6%
0.13%
0.07%
0.03%
0.01%
2.5 ppm
300 ppb
80 ppb
30 ppb
10.5 ppb
Mars (symbol: ♂) is the fourth planet from the Sun in the Solar System and the nearest neighbor to Earth. It is named after the Roman god of war, Mars. The red planet is about half the diameter of Earth,[1] and is uninhabitable by humans.[2] Mars has water in the form of vapor, liquid[3] and ice, and a very thin atmosphere, most of which is carbon dioxide and the rest is mainly nitrogen.[1] The thin atmosphere is due to Mars's low gravity. Mars is also so cold that carbon dioxide in its atmosphere condenses into polar caps from time to time. Mars also has two small moons, Phobos and Deimos.[4]

There is no known life on Mars. In ancient times, a dense atmosphere was created by volcanic gases from Mars, and Mars had vast oceans.[5] The surface of Mars today resembles the deserts of Earth and the Moon. Mars has craters, deep valleys, dry riverbeds and sand dunes, clouds, and polar caps.[5] Mars has been explored by many unmanned space probes. A manned mission to Mars, which has not yet been completed, is also a common topic of planning.

History
Early observations
Mars was recognized as a planet in the sky early on, with the first known observation being by the ancient Egyptians.[6] Telescope observations of Mars began in the 17th century, when Christian Huygens saw a dark region on the planet's surface, later named Syrtis Major.[7]

Giacomo Maraldi observed the planet's rotation in the late 17th and early 18th centuries, and also observed the polar caps. Maraldi was unsure whether the dark features on the planet were part of the planet's surface or cloud formations.[8] The polar caps were also observed by William Herschel, who measured the planet's diameter approximately correctly. Herschel also determined the planet's period of rotation and noted the planet's axial tilt, deducing that Mars has seasons.[8]

The first reasonably accurate maps were not drawn until the late 19th century. Johann Hieronymus Schröter drew a picture of Mars in the late 18th century and saw the planet's polar caps and some surface features. He thought the dark features on the planet were clouds. Flaugergues concluded in the late 18th and early 19th centuries that he saw a solid surface of Mars. In the 19th century, Fraunhofer began building much more accurate, larger telescopes equipped with achromatic lenses than the earlier ones.[9]

In the 1830s, Beer and Mädler confirmed that Martian features were not clouds, and attempted to determine the longitudes of some features and measure surface contours with crosshairs. They also noted seasonal variations in the Martian south polar cap and noted that the Martian polar caps were of different sizes. They measured the planet's rotation period quite accurately.[9]

In 1877, Asaph Hall discovered the Martian moons Phobos and Deimos,[10] and in the same year, Italian astronomer Giovanni Schiaparelli claimed to have seen canals on the surface of Mars.[11] The existence of canals on Mars was hotly debated for about 25 years, and accurate observations of the 1909 opposition proved that there were no canals. They were optical illusions, visible only with moderately inaccurate telescopes.[12][13] Water vapor and oxygen were searched for in the Martian atmosphere in the early 20th century, but were not found. In the 1910s–1930s, canal enthusiast Percival Lowell's observations of seasonal variations in the dark regions of Mars were confirmed.[13] Clouds were observed, some of which were correctly thought to be related to differences in surface elevation. There was some debate as to whether the polar caps of Mars were carbon dioxide ice or water ice.[14] The atmospheric pressure was estimated to be about 85 millibars based on cloud observations. In 1920, a group of scientists used a thermocouple to measure the temperature of Mars, which was measured to be between −70 and +30 °C, depending on the region.[15] Around 1910–1960, it was speculated that the dark areas of Mars were vegetation with seasonal changes.

In 1947, astronomer Gerard Kuiper discovered carbon dioxide in the Martian atmosphere.[14] However, he did not believe that the polar caps were composed of carbon dioxide ice.[14] In 1950, it was believed that the Martian atmosphere was mostly nitrogen with a small amount of carbon dioxide. In the same year, Tombaugh, Öpik, and Ralph B. Baldwin suggested that Mars had numerous craters, similar to the Moon.[15] In 1956, Kuiper suggested that the dark, variable areas on Mars were dust-covered lava fields.[15] The Russian VV Šaranov came to the same conclusion. Around the same time, McLaughlin suggested that Mars was volcanically active, an idea that many others opposed.[15]

In 1963, Audouin Dollfus and his team photographed the infrared spectrum of Mars from a high mountain. This led them to conclude that Mars contains very little water, and that the partial pressure of carbon dioxide was 4.2 millibars. This suggests that the atmospheric pressure on Mars is less than 25 millibars, making Mars drier than any desert on Earth. Previously, the atmospheric pressure on Mars was assumed to be 85 millibars.[15] In 1965, the American space probe Mariner 4 flew by Mars, ushering in a new era in the study of Mars.[16] It revealed craters on Mars and measured the planet's atmosphere to be very thin.[17]

According to research published by NASA in September 2015, liquid water may exist on the surface of Mars in the form of crystalline perchlorate compounds (such as NaClO4 and Mg(ClO4)2).[18]

Space probes
Main article: List of Mars probes

Size comparison of Mars landers.

Electricity generation from some Mars probes in one cell.
Mars has been approached by unmanned spacecraft since 1960. The American Mariner 4 flew by Mars on July 15, 1965, sending back the first images of Martian craters.[16] In the late 1960s, the Mariner 6 and 7 flybys were sent to Mars, which sent back more images.[19][20] The successful American Mariner 9 mapped the surface of Mars in 1971.[21] Around the same time, the Soviet Mars 2 lander became the first man-made object to land on Mars, although the soft landing did not go as planned and the lander was destroyed.[22] The Mars 3 lander suffered the same fate.[22] In 1976, the first planned successful landing on Mars occurred with the American Viking probe.[23]

At the turn of the year 2003–2004, Earth and Mars were in an almost ideal orbit, making it affordable to send probes. As a result, several probes were sent on their journey in a short period of time. The Japanese Nozomi was already on its way. It had problems from the start, and contact with it was eventually lost shortly before it reached its destination.[24] ESA's Mars Express probe carried a lander named Beagle 2, after Charles Darwin's ship HMS Beagle. The probe successfully entered a polar orbit, but disappeared. The fate of Beagle 2 is still unknown.[25] NASA, in turn, built two almost identical landers, Spirit[26] and Opportunity[27] (meaning "Spirit" and "Opportunity"). They proved to be successful, and both probes have returned a wealth of images and research data. Spirit sent its last signals in 2010.[28] NASA officially declared Opportunity "dead" and its mission ended on February 13, 2019. The rover was hit by a severe dust storm in June 2018, after which contact with it was lost despite numerous attempts. The rover sent its last message to Earth on June 10, 2018. [29]

The most recent major Mars lander is Curiosity, launched on November 26, 2011, with the Mars Science Laboratory. Curiosity's purpose is to investigate the possibility of life on the planet. The rover landed on the planet's surface on August 6, 2012.[30]

On its Independence Day, 15 August 2012, India announced its intention to send a space probe into orbit around Mars to study the Martian atmosphere. The Mars Orbiter Mission is scheduled to be launched in November 2013 aboard the Indian Space Research Organisation's Polar Satellite Launch Vehicle (PSLV).[31][32]

As of 2019, the largest payload landed on Mars is the 899 kg MSL Curiosity rover from 2012. Of that, about 80 kg are measuring instruments. The largest single-cell electricity output was generated by the InSight probe in 2018, 4588 Wh.

On May 5, 2018, the American InSight lander was launched to Mars, landing on Mars on November 26, 2018.[33] InSight has been collecting data primarily from beneath the surface of Mars. It has measured the temperature of the dry, dusty planet and studied the vibrations of the Martian crust around its landing site, Elysium Planitia. Previous instruments have only studied the planet's surface.[34]

China plans to send a probe to Mars in 2020, called Long March 5. It is intended to land on the planet's surface and explore it using a rover. The flight to Mars will take seven months. The United Arab Emirates is also planning to go to Mars. The Hope probe, which will be launched in July 2020, is the first project by an Arab or Muslim state. Its goal is to study the causes of the loss of Mars' atmosphere. It is hoped that the study will also shed light on what conditions existed in the Earth's atmosphere a million years ago. The Hope probe is scheduled to arrive on Mars in 2021 to celebrate the 50th anniversary of the United Arab Emirates.[34]

Physical properties
Surface and geology
Main article: Geology of Mars
When viewed through a telescope, Mars shows darker and lighter areas (continents and seas, mare) as well as polar caps, the size of which varies considerably depending on the season. The most famous landform visible from Earth is the dark Syrtis Major, which is probably dark material ejected by a volcano. Mars resembles the landforms partly of the Moon and partly of the Earth. The northern hemisphere mostly has pale former seabeds. A large part of Mars' southern hemisphere is covered in craters, but there are other landforms as well.

The characteristic red color of Mars comes from iron oxide in its surface sand. According to measurements by the Viking probe, the Martian surface is about 13% iron, 21% silicon, and also contains sulfur, more than ten times the amount found on Earth. Winds lift the red dust of Mars high into the atmosphere, so the Martian sky also appears red, especially near the horizon.[35]


The hemispheres of Mars.
Space probes have discovered huge volcanoes on the surface of Mars, the tallest of which is Olympus Mons in the Tharsis Plateau and the largest is Alba Patera. To the east of this is the Valles Marineris, a rift valley over 4,000 km long, 200 km wide, and in places over 9 km deep.[36] Hellas and Argyre are large ancient impact craters.

Water has flowed on the planet's surface at times. Permafrost thawing has occurred in so-called chaotic regions. Ancient riverbeds left by flowing water have been found in many places, including traces of ancient shorelines. Some craters show dust-covered glaciers. One area resembles a frozen sea covered in dust. In some crater birth sites, the surrounding material has been spattered like mud, not like dry matter. It is estimated that the water on Mars is too salty, at least for microbes found on Earth. On the other hand, the cyanobacterial population in the Atacama Desert lives in almost similar conditions.[3]

Many of Mars' landforms suggest that the surface has not been renewed much in many places since the planet's birth. It was once thought that Mars' surface was flat, but probes have shown that the surface varies in elevation by 31 km. If we take into account the radii of the planets, Mars is three times "rougher" than Earth, which varies in elevation by only about 20 km.

The zero altitude of Mars is defined as the average pressure surface of 6.105 mbar. Above the pressure surface is 67 percent of the Martian surface, below 33 percent.

Images taken by the Mars Odyssey spacecraft have revealed seven cave-like formations. These caves appear to be approximately 70–95 meters deep.[37][38][3]

Polar caps

Sunset at Gusev Crater as captured by Spirit.
Main articles: Polar caps of Mars and Martian seasons
Mars has a north and south polar ice cap, each several kilometers thick, which are now thought to consist mostly of water ice, with carbon dioxide ice on and in the crust. The north polar ice cap, which is approximately constant in size, extends to latitude 70°, and the south polar ice cap, at its widest, extends to latitude 60°. The north polar ice cap of Mars is surrounded by dark dune areas.

From late summer or autumn to winter, a polar veil, which is a cloud or fog, surrounds and covers the polar caps. It thickens over time and condenses into a polar cap at about the point of the veil.

The polar caps, which are mostly composed of water ice but are covered in carbon dioxide ice, are spiral-shaped and consist of many layers. Each has at least one large canyon leading outward. The layers alternate between layers of dark dust and lighter layers of ice. At least part of the northern polar cap is water ice, several kilometers thick. The spiral shape of the canyons of the polar cap may have been created by wind erosion or a melt-freeze process.[39] According to radar measurements, the polar caps have not depressed the surface of Mars as they have on Earth. The amount of water in the Martian polar caps is not sufficient to explain the amount of water that has sometimes rippled on its surface, as inferred from shorelines and other evidence.

During the cold winter months, 25 percent of the carbon dioxide in the Martian atmosphere condenses in the polar caps, either north or south. Most of the water on Mars is likely permafrost in the surface layer of the soil. On Mars, carbon dioxide occasionally condenses into frost. Carbon dioxide ice is observed in shadowed areas in many craters outside the polar caps.

Gas ring
Main article: Atmosphere of Mars
The first observations of the Martian atmosphere were made as early as 1783 by William Herschel, when he concluded that the changes he saw on the surface of Mars were due to the movements of gases and clouds.

The atmospheric pressure on Mars is about 6 millibars, but it varies greatly depending on location and season. In the higher altitudes, the Martian “air,” which consists of 95.32 percent carbon dioxide, nitrogen, and argon, is thinner, and in the lowlands it is significantly denser. The atmospheric pressure varies with the season, among other things because part of the carbon dioxide atmosphere binds to the polar ice caps in winter.

The Martian atmosphere contains about nine times more carbon dioxide than Earth's atmosphere.[40] The atmosphere contains 0.03% water vapor.[40]

The average temperature of the surface of Mars is −55 °C, while on Earth it is about 15 °C. At the poles, the temperature can drop to −133 °C at night, and at the equator it can rise to +20…+25 °C. The daily temperature variation is more than 50 degrees. The weather on Mars is much more regular than on Earth.

The Martian atmosphere contains very small amounts of water vapor. The polar ice caps and permafrost contain large amounts of water. White crystalline clouds of carbon dioxide and water ice occur on Mars. Water ice clouds hover at an altitude of about 10 km, and carbon dioxide ice clouds at an altitude of about 50 km. The upper atmosphere of Mars is estimated to extend to an altitude of about 300 km.[40][41] Dust storms, somewhat resembling tornadoes, are common on Mars. Larger dust storms occur, sometimes obscuring the entire surface of the planet.

Because there is no protective magnetic field, the atmosphere is constantly being lost to space by the solar wind, at a rate of about 100 grams per second.[42]

Ancient conditions and the possibility of life
Main article: Life on Mars

NASA's hypothetical view of ancient oceans on Mars.
It is assumed that in ancient times the northern parts of Mars were covered by an ocean up to a kilometer deep in places.[5] Mars may have had a dense atmosphere for 500 million years, about 4 billion years ago. However, today Mars is on average too cold for life as we know it, and the atmosphere is too thin. There have been periods in the planet's past when volcanoes have released gases into the atmosphere and it has been thicker. However, it is not known how long these periods have been, and the development of life in turn takes a long time. Mars is a terrestrial planet, but a small one. There is no significant magnetic field that protects against solar particle radiation after the core cooled, but the weak magnetic fields found around certain regions may be a remnant of a former field that covered the entire planet. The Martian mantle no longer has sufficient flows to produce plate tectonics. Mars also does not have an ozone layer to protect against ultraviolet radiation.


The surface of the ALH 84001 meteorite photographed with an electron microscope.
As late as the 1960s, it was believed that Mars could support life, as the atmosphere was considered quite thick and seasonal variations were observed on the surface. Later, these were revealed to be the movement of dark and light dust along with the planet's seasonal winds. In the late 19th century and early 20th century, channels were seen on the surface of Mars, which were later revealed to be the human eye's tendency to combine dark dots. Channel maps were made by the Italian Giovanni Schiaparelli and the American Percival Lowell. These channels were believed to have been built by Martians. Belief in channels waned as early as the 1910s. Probes that have explored Mars have indeed found smaller riverbeds and lake shores, possibly shaped by water or ice. Although some of the soil analyses performed by the Viking probes were disputed at the time, no life has been found on Mars.

It has been suggested that the small amount of methane in the Martian atmosphere could be the result of microscopic life forms beneath the planet's crust. On September 19, 2013, a study based on observations by the Curiosity rover revealed that the atmospheric methane levels were a fraction of those previously observed from Earth or space. The study reduces the possibility of microscopic life on the planet, although it does not rule it out.[43][44][45]

Detection
Mars is best seen when it is closest to Earth, i.e. at opposition. It is worth observing Mars around opposition. Because Mars' orbit is quite elliptical, the opposition distances between Earth and Mars vary. When Mars is close to the Sun, opposition is called perihelion opposition. Perihelion opposition, where Mars is close to Earth, is not very common. Close oppositions of Mars occur once every 15–17 years in July–September. At close oppositions, features of Mars can be seen even with small telescopes. On August 27, 2003 at 9:51:13 UTC, Mars was at its closest in 60,000 years, at a distance of 55,758,006 km (0.37271 AU) from Earth. However, from Finland, perihelion oppositions are unfavorable because Mars is then very low on the horizon in the direction of the constellation Sagittarius. In Finland, the best oppositions are those following perihelion opposition, when the planet rises higher in the sky. The previous opposition of Mars was on January 29, 2010, and the next opposition was on March 3, 2012 (aphelion opposition). The planet Mercury, which orbits closer to Earth, has sometimes eclipsed Mars, which is far away on the other side of the Sun.

From Earth, Mars appears to the naked eye like a bright star. When viewed with a large telescope, it shows darker and lighter areas, “continents” and “seas,” which are now known to be different types of surface land. Also visible to Earth are the north and south polar caps of varying sizes, yellow dust storms, and white clouds. The most famous dark area on Mars is Syrtis Major, which stands out quite well even with a small telescope. With a normal-sized telescope, the craters on Mars are not visible, except for the pale Hellas.

Topographic map

Elevation map of Mars.
Maps of Mars have been made since the late 19th century. Early maps show dark and light areas. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, maps of Mars based on telescope observations were made by Green, JN Lockyear, Giovanni Schiaparelli, Earl Charles Slipher, Percival Lowell and Eugène Antoniadi, among others. At one point, canals were thought to be visible on the surface of Mars. Current maps are based on images taken by space probes. The first extensive mapping of Mars was done by the American Mariner 9, which orbited Mars. It was followed by Viking 1 and Viking 2. There is a need to map Mars more and more precisely for future probe flights and to obtain information. Today, Mars is being mapped by the European Mars Express.

Moons
Main article: Moons of Mars

Mars' moons Phobos (above) and Deimos (below) in correct size.

Distance differences between Phobos and Deimos from Mars.
Mars has two moons, Phobos (Fear) and Deimos (Horror).[4] Both are very small compared to Earth's moon and their parent planet: Phobos is 22.2 kilometers in diameter, Deimos 12.4 kilometers.

Mars may have captured the moons from the nearby asteroid belt, as they are similar in appearance, size, and composition to rocky asteroids. It has also been suggested that the moons originated when one or more objects collided with Mars, throwing large amounts of material into orbit, which accumulated to form Phobos and Deimos.[46]

Both circumpolar planets were discovered by Asaph Hall in 1877. They are named after the sons of the god Ares in Greek mythology.

Name 	Number Diameter
(km)[4] 	Mass
(kg)[4] 	Orbital radius
(km)[4] 	Lap time
(d)[4] 	Year of discovery[4]
Phobos 	I22,21,07 · 10169 3780,31891877
Deimos 	II12,41,47 · 101523 4581,26241877
Meteorites

ALH 84001.
Some meteorites contain material from Mars. When a large object has collided with Mars, some of the fragments of the impactor and Mars created in the collision have reached such high speeds that they have been able to escape the gravitational field of Mars. After this, the fragment has hit Earth as a meteorite. The best-known meteorite of Martian origin is ALH 84001.

Manned Mars flight and Mars colonization
Main article: Manned Mars flight and Mars colonization
Various plans have been made for manned missions to Mars and the colonization of Mars. It has also been suggested that Mars could even be made Earth-like, since the planet has frozen water and some atmosphere. This would require, among other things, increasing the atmospheric pressure by more than a hundredfold, removing toxic carbon dioxide, and increasing the oxygen-nitrogen mixture, for example by releasing it from soil and ice; in practice, creating an atmosphere and protecting it from the solar wind. The ethics of making Mars Earth-like have sparked scientific debate.[47]

NASA has been considering a manned flight to Mars since the 1950s, when Collier magazine, among others, lobbied for spaceflight on many topics. In the 1960s, Mars flights were an alternative to the Apollo program in case the Soviets had reached the Moon before the Americans. Mars flights were also part of the Space Exploration Initiative (SEI) project in the late 1980s and, since 2004, in the Moon to Mars program. As in the plan from the late 1980s, a manned flight to Mars is likely to be realized no earlier than 2030.

The Soviet Union showed great interest in Mars in the 1980s (for example, the Phobos probes, Mars-96).

The European Space Agency's Aurora program, especially in the early stages, included an investment in manned flights, but has since shifted mainly to unmanned ones.

The Dutch company Mars One planned to select a multinational group of 40 people for a multi-year training program from volunteers who had registered online in 2014. Of those who would participate in the training, 2 men and 2 women would be selected for a one-way trip to Mars in September 2022.[48]


BFR Starship Mk2 prototype under construction. Cocoa, Florida, August 2019.
SpaceX is developing a spacecraft called BFR, which is suitable for Mars flights. The first prototypes are under construction in 2019. The company's goal is to colonize Mars. The first and, according to SpaceX founder Elon Musk, the most difficult step is to develop a sufficiently large and affordable transportation solution.

Mars volcanoes
Olympus Mons is an extinct volcano located in the volcanic Tharsis Plateau along with three other shield volcanoes: Arsia Mons, Pavonis Mons, and Ascraeus Mons.

Volcano size comparisons

Olympus Mons compared to France.

Olympus Mons in false color.

Olympus Mons compared to mountains on Earth.
Terraforming Mars
Terraforming Mars would involve modifying the Martian conditions, such as climate and atmosphere, to be suitable for life.[49] Two theoretical options have been proposed, the first being to evaporate the carbon dioxide ice in the polar caps by raising the temperature of the Martian atmosphere with greenhouse gases. The second option is to heat and vaporize the polar caps using mirrors placed in orbit around Mars.
