Titan (moon)

Discovery
Discoverers 	Christiaan Huygens
Date of discovery: 	March 25, 1655
Orbital characteristics
Planet 	Saturn
Average distance 	1,221,931 km
Eccentricity 	0.028880
Rotation period 	15.94542 d
Inclination 	0.34854°
Physical properties
Equatorial diameter 	5,150 km
Area 	83,000,000 km2
Mass 	1.345×1023 kg
0.025 Earth masses
Average density 	1.88 g/cm3
Gravity at surface 	1.35 m/s2
Escape velocity on the surface 	2.639 km/s
Rotation period 	15.94542 d
Axis inclination 	0°
Albedo 	0.21
Surface temperature 	lowest: K
average: 94 K
top: K
Gas ring properties
Gas pressure 	160 kPa
Composition
nitrogen
methane 	95%
5%
Titan is the largest moon of Saturn.[1] It was discovered by Dutch astronomer Christiaan Huygens on March 25, 1655.[2] Titan is larger in diameter than the planet Mercury, but significantly less massive. Titan is the second-largest moon in the Solar System, after Ganymede.

Titan is so cold that, among other things, water exists as ice on its surface and is one of the building blocks of "bedrock," and instead of water, methane flows in lakes.[3] Titan is the only moon in the solar system with a dense atmosphere. The atmosphere consists mainly of nitrogen, methane, and ethane, and the haze in it obscures the moon's features in visible light. The atmosphere is still transparent to radar and infrared. The atmosphere makes it possible for Titan to have some hydrocarbon lakes on its surface. Otherwise, Titan's surface has volcanic formations, rift valleys, wind-shaped dunes, and streaky formations, and even a few craters.

Titan is of particular interest to scientists because it is believed to resemble the early Earth to some extent. It is even considered possible for life to exist, based on its abundant hydrocarbons. It has been studied by, among others, the Hubble Space Telescope and the Cassini-Huygens spacecraft.

Geology of Titan

Cross-section of Titan's atmosphere and core.
Titan is fairly flat, with elevation variations of no more than a couple of kilometers. Titan's surface is known in its entirety, albeit very imprecisely, from images taken from the ground and from distant images taken by the Cassini spacecraft. Cassini's radar beam is so narrow that it is not possible to map large areas at a time with a single pass. The moon's surface is covered by a mixture of water ice and hydrocarbons. The ice is in the form of rocks. The ice contains coarse mineral matter of sand or clay. The surface temperature is estimated to be 93.8 kelvins (about −180 °C) based on measurements by the Huygens spacecraft. Titan's crust consists of ice, beneath which is estimated to be a molten layer about tens of kilometers thick. It was created by frictional heating caused by Saturn's tidal forces. From there, liquid "lava" probably erupts from time to time in "ice volcanoes", which are a mixture of water and ammonia. Lava is produced by the heating effect of radioactive decay, just as it is on Earth. Lava erupted by ice volcanoes is likely denser than ice, and requires an additional source of power, which may be tidal forces. The tidal forces exerted by Saturn are 400 times greater on Titan's surface than those exerted by the Moon on Earth.

Before the Cassini probe's studies, it was thought that the most prominent features on Titan's surface would be impact craters and similar formations, like those on Earth's Moon. But Titan surprisingly contained more geological and landform features that resembled Earth.

Only a few meteorite craters are visible in images taken from Titan because the surface is renewed so quickly.

Infrared images of Titan's surface show dark plains and light volcanic areas, the most famous of which is Xanadu. Xanadu has a variety of terrain, including fissures. The light areas are thought to be slightly darker areas higher up. The large dark areas at the equator were previously interpreted as seas, but are now thought to be dune fields formed by hydrocarbon sand and dust. The large, dark, dry area at the equator is called Shangri-La.

The surface features pale, round domes resembling the volcanic "pancakes" of Venus. A pale mountain range, perhaps covered in methane snow, has also been discovered, likely formed by the collision of two "continental plates". One theory is that Titan's mountains were formed as it shrank.[4]


Infrared images taken from Titan.
Along the boundary of different types of areas, the coastline, there are landforms resembling riverbeds and estuaries. In addition, there are dark short sections of channels on the surface, the formation of which is considered to be more likely to be from methane sources than from methane rain. The light ridges are perhaps water ice that has erupted through the surface.

Titan's hydrocarbon lakes are closer to the poles. The Cassini spacecraft detected several methane lakes on Titan's surface, one of which is named after Lake Koitere in Finland.[5] The lake is about 70 kilometers long. Titan's methane lakes have been found to be concentrated near the north and south poles, leaving the equator a relatively dry area, with more lakes at the north pole than at the south pole. The largest methane lake found on the moon is larger than Finland.[3] Titan's largest lake may be the Kraken Sea, which has been partially mapped by radar.

Titan's atmosphere

Titan's atmosphere as seen by the Cassini spacecraft.
Titan's atmosphere was discovered by Gerard Kuiper in 1944. The atmosphere consists of nitrogen, methane, and small amounts of other substances such as ethane.

Titan's atmosphere is 98.4% nitrogen, 1.6% methane, and traces of other simple hydrocarbons. Ethane and acetylene give the atmosphere a hazy, yellowish color.[6] The pressure in Titan's nitrogen-methane atmosphere is about 1.5 bar at the surface, where the temperature is 94 K (−179 °C). There are clouds of methane or ethane crystals in a small area above the north pole, about 40 km above the upper limit of Titan's troposphere. Methane ice clouds are likely lower, above 15 km, and 10% of Titan's surface is covered in clouds at an altitude of about 20 km.

Below 160 kilometers in the stratosphere, nitrogen and methane are both present in equal amounts. In the troposphere, the amount of methane increases steadily as you go down. At an altitude of twenty kilometers, there are methane clouds, and near the surface, in addition to methane, there is also an ethane fog. The methane in the gas cycle comes from volcanoes.

Titan's stratosphere is at an altitude of 45–280 km, where the temperature rises from about 80 kelvin to 180 kelvin. There is an ethane-acetylene atmosphere. In the very thin mesosphere, at an altitude of about 180–600 km, the temperature decreases again.[7][6] At an altitude of about 30–55 km, the temperature is constant. Above 60 km, the temperature begins to increase. The pressure there is about 0.05 bar. At an altitude of 20 km, it is 0.5 bar.

Titan's atmospheric greenhouse effect is estimated to be about 12 °C,[8] which is lower than that of Venus (about 96% carbon dioxide) and Earth (about 1.25% water vapor and about 0.04% carbon dioxide), but higher than that of Mars (about 95% carbon dioxide). It is caused by, among other things, methane (about 1.4%) and hydrogen (about 0.1–0.2%). The greenhouse effect is obtained by calculating the temperature based on an albedo of 0.21 and comparing it with the observed temperature. The deviation is caused by Titan's complex anti-greenhouse effect.[9][10]'

Climate
Many attempts have been made to predict Titan's climate, but previous attempts have not been very successful. In 2011, however, scientists managed to create a fairly accurate model of Titan's atmosphere. The study found that most of the methane lakes on Titan's surface are located in the moon's polar regions, and this is estimated to be due to the lower than average amount of sunlight in the polar regions. Another significant factor in the location of lakes in the polar regions is rainfall. Titan's equator is a fairly dry area, and most of Titan's rainfall occurs near the poles. Unlike rainfall on Earth, it rains methane on Titan.

Titan's clouds are also composed of methane. Although the clouds largely resemble those on Earth, there are significant differences. Titan's clouds are enormous compared to the size of the moon; a single cloud can be over 1,000 kilometers across, and they are very high, reaching up to 40 kilometers into Titan's tropopause. In comparison, clouds on Earth rise to a maximum height of 18 kilometers. If you look at Titan's clouds from below, they appear very black, because they do not let much light through. If you look at the clouds from the side, they are quite bright, quite similar to Earth's clouds, although they have an orange tint due to the composition of Titan's atmosphere. Although clouds are quite common in the polar regions, they cover a relatively small area of the moon's surface. Titan's clouds cover about 1 percent of the surface, while Earth's clouds cover up to 65 percent. Clouds are much rarer on Titan at lower latitudes.

While the polar regions enjoyed abundant rainfall, the equator can go for years without a single drop of rain. As a result, Titan's equator is an extremely dry region. Scientists were surprised when the Cassini spacecraft, which landed in 2005, sent back images of dry riverbeds on the equator. This led them to conclude that the equator had once had significant amounts of liquid, although no one understood how this was possible. Even the most humid models had only managed to bring light drizzle to this region. Studies conducted in 2011 also showed the equator to be a dry region. According to scientists, large clouds accumulate in the equatorial region about every 15 years, which could cause a "super rain", which could be enough to carve features into Titan's surface.[3]

Exploring Titan
Ground-based telescopes have observed variations in the color of Titan's surface. The Voyager 1 and Voyager 2 probes studied Titan's atmosphere during flybys in the 1970s and 1980s.

The Cassini-Huygens probe entered orbit around Saturn in July 2004. Cassini studies Saturn, its rings and moons, and especially Titan, using radar, among other things. The Huygens probe was designed exclusively to study Titan. Cassini sent it towards Titan on December 25, 2004. The probe successfully landed on Titan's surface on January 14, 2005. Huygens studied, among other things, the composition of the atmosphere as it fell. It survived the landing and was able to send back information about the conditions on Titan's surface.

The aim was to detect the winds in the gas ring by accurately measuring the Huygens landing. A global network of radio telescopes monitored the signal emitted by the probe. From the direction measurements combined with long-range interferometry, the probe's path was determined with an accuracy of one kilometer.
